 

 

 

 

 

If mice were reptiles, then reptiles could be mammals 

or 

How to detect errors in the JeuxDeMots lexical network? 

 

Mathieu Lafourcade 1   Alain Joubert 

1   Nathalie Le Brun 

2  

(1) LIRMM, 860 rue de St Priest, 34095 Montpellier cedex 5, France 

(2) Imagin@t, 34400 Lunel, France 

lafourcade@lirmm.fr, joubert@lirmm.fr, imaginat@imaginat.name 

 

 

Abstract Correcting errors in a data set is a critical 

issue. This task can be either hand-made 

by experts, or by crowdsourcing methods 

or automatically done using algorithms. 

Although even if the rate of errors present 

in a given lexical network is rather low, it 

is important to reduce it. We present here 

automatic methods for detecting potential 

secondary errors that would result from 

automatic inference mechanisms when 

they rely on an initial error manually 

detected. Encouraging results also invite 

us to consider strategies that would 

automatically detect "erroneous" initial 

relations, which could lead to the 

automatic detection of the majority of 

errors in a lexical-semantic network. 

 

1 Introduction 

Any collection of data contains errors and, 

depending on the domain and applications 

concerned, their quantity is more or less 

tolerable. Although the anomaly rate is 

relatively low (well below 1%), the 

JeuxDeMots (JDM) network is no exception 

(Lafourcade, 2007). Minimizing this error rate 

remains a priority and requires effective 

detection strategies to optimize the correction 

rate. 

The anomalies are various. They may relate 

either to terms, such as spelling mistakes (eg 

théâtre / théatre) or to the relations between 

terms (eg, Milou est_un humain, or Dalida, an 

idea_associated to Samson, by confusion 

between Dalida and Delilah). 

 

Currently, the detection of anomalies is 

essentially carried out manually by players / 

contributors via their activity of enriching the 

network through the Diko interface 1  (the 

contributory dictionary of lexical associations 

of the JDM project). But since errors are 

discovered by chance, this mode of detection 

cannot claim to be exhaustive, hence the need 

to develop a true detection method. 

First, we investigate the origin of the 

anomalies and then present a method that 

detects and reports a number of relationships as 

false. It is up to the human validator to decide 

whether to make corrections or not. Although 

experimented and exemplified on the JDM 

data, our approach remains fully generic and 

can be applied on other lexical-semantic 

network. 

 

2 Where do the Anomalies in a Lexical-

Semantic Network Come from? 

The construction method and the 

characteristics of the JDM network (our test 

case) as described in (Lafourcade et al., 2015) 

make it vulnerable to two main types of errors: 

"Initial" anomalies introduced by the players 

and the contributors, voluntarily or not. In our 

experience, these are essentially unintentional 

errors, as the interest in voluntarily entering 

erroneous information is very limited. Indeed, 

                                                 1  http://www.jeuxdemots.org/diko.php 

424

   

 

because of the principle of building the JDM 

network, a relation is created (or reinforced if it 

already exists) only if both players have 

proposed it in response to the same instruction.  

The games being played anonymously and 

asynchronously, any communication between 

the players of the same game is not possible, 

therefore cheating is made very difficult if not 

impossible. Entering inconsistencies therefore 

has only an extremely low probability of 

having consequences on the recorded data. 

This leads to a significant reduction in risk, but 

does not completely cancel it. 

"Secondary" anomalies are induced by 

automatic inference mechanisms (deduction, 

induction, abduction) from initial anomalies. 

Indeed, the JDM network can be densified 

automatically by inferences from existing 

relations (Lafourcade et al., 2014); if some of 

these "initial" relations are wrong, then the 

inference mechanisms will generate potentially 

erroneous relations. When automatically 

inferred relations are considered doubtful by 

the system, their validation is subject to a 

majority vote process and / or expert opinion, 

which greatly reduces the risk of recording 

erroneous relations. 

 

Let's take an example: we have the relation 

mouse is_a mammal. Let us suppose that the 

erroneous "initial" relation has then appeared: 

mouse is_a reptile. The system "knows" that 

mammal and reptile are incompatible, just like 

mammal and fish or mammal and insect, for 

example. It deduces then that mouse is 

polysemous, and thus appear the refinements: 

mouse>mammal and mouse>reptile. From this 

latter refinement, by deduction / induction 

mechanisms, the system can generate new 

relations which will probably be erroneous 

since the refinement mouse>reptile is 

erroneous. 

 

3 How to Detect and Correct Anomalies 

Several authors have studied the problem of 

automatic detection / correction of errors in the 

domain of NLP. Boudin and Hernandez (2012) 

propose methods for automatic detection / 

correction of syntax annotation errors in the 

French Treebank, based on an approach 

previously presented by Dikinson and Meurers 

(2003). Regarding the detection / correction of 

semantic errors, we find the work of Ben 

Othmane Zribi et al. (2007) for the Arabic 

language. Bouraoui et al. (2009) analyzed the 

different types of errors encountered in written 

expression, in order to realize a general 

typology of errors.  

First of all, let us note that in the JDM 

network, correcting an anomaly does not mean 

erasing the relation concerned, but more 

precisely negating it, that is assigning it a 

negative weight. A relation with a negative 

weight is deemed to be false. 

Indeed, it may be interesting to have (or keep) 

the  information that a relation is not true, 

rather than having no information about that 

relation (by deleting it). 

For example, if the relation ostrich r_agent fly  

is negatively weighted it means that an ostrich 

cannot fly, while the absence of relation would 

mean that one does not know whether an 

ostrich can fly or not. 

Moreover, by negating a relation, one ensures 

that it cannot reappear, which could be the case 

by suppressing it. Our automatic error detector 

will prepare this correction process: by 

contributing by a negative vote on a suspicious 

relation, it will signal it as such to the human 

validator, who will decide and negate it (or not 

...). 

3.1 Initial Anomalies 

Initial errors seem difficult to detect by 

endogenous mechanisms. For example, if two 

players on the same game proposed the relation 

mouse is_a reptile, the system is not yet able to 

detect that it is an erroneous relation. It can 

only deduce from it that mouse is polysemous. 

These relations are currently reported by 

contributors / players, then they are manually 

corrected by an expert (again by negating the 

relations). Exogenous mechanisms, based on 

knowledge external to the JDM network 

(Wikipedia, Babelnet …), could be envisaged, 

especially with regard to misspelling on terms. 

3.2 Secondary Anomalies 

When an error is detected (by a contributor), 

how to find false inferences that the system 

could make from this error? It turns out that 

425

   

these false relations that the system has 

inferred have been created either by deduction, 

or, to a lesser extent, by induction (Lafourcade 

et al., 2014). 

 

Deduction 

The mechanism of deduction is the following 

(Zarrouk, et al., 2014): let be R an arbitrary 

semantic relation. If A is_a B and B R C, then 

A R C may be possible (except for exception or 

polysemy of B). Thus, if A is_a B is false, it 

may be that A R C is also false. It is necessary 

to indicate as false the outgoing relations from 

A which come from properties of B, except 

those which come from hypernyms of A. 

 

Ex: mouse is_a reptile => inferences about 

mouse based on reptile properties. 

(The statement “mouse is_a reptile => 

inferences” is to be read as “if mouse is a 

reptile then some inferences are true”) 

How to detect, and thus negate, these false 

inferences? It is known that mouse is_a 

mammal. In the outgoing relations of mouse, it 

is necessary to point out as potentially false 

those which come from properties of reptile 

with the exclusion of those that would be in 

common between reptile and mammal. 

For example, reptile r_agent to_lay_eggs, is 

not a shared relation with mammal => thus, the 

relation mouse agent to_lay_eggs (inferred by 

deduction) is to be reported as false. 

A contrario, reptile has_part vertebrae, and 

mammal has_part vertebrae => thus, the 

relation mouse has_part vertebrae is to be 

preserved. 

 

The problem is not limited to the relations 

concerning the only term for which the 

anomaly was detected. By deduction process, 

the system was able to infer new erroneous 

relations (ex: mouse agent to_lay_eggs), and 

from these erroneous relations, infer new 

erroneous relations. 

 

The erroneous relation being derived from 

mouse, any specific of mouse (like white 

mouse or laboratory mouse) would be able to 

be infected by application of the deduction. It 

will therefore be necessary to also look for 

potentially erroneous "secondary" relations 

deduced from some specifics of mouse. 

For example, as white_mouse is_a mouse, the 

relation white_mouse agent to_lay_eggs could 

be inferred. How to detect this new erroneous 

relation? The relation mouse agent to_lay_eggs 

having received a negative vote in the 

preceding step, the detection system will take 

this into account and also report this relation as 

suspicious by assigning it a negative 

contribution. 

Secondary errors may also have spread to the 

generic chain of the initial term. If A is_a B is 

wrong, in order to search for potentially 

erroneous "secondary" relations, the human 

validator must go back in the generic chain of 

B to check the validity of the different generic 

relations between A and the terms encountered.  

As soon as the validator encounters a valid 

relation, it will no longer be necessary to go 

back up. For example, mouse is_a reptile is 

wrong. So, do we have :  

 reptile is_a sauropside => mouse is_a 

sauropside ? answer : erroneous relation, 

it is put negative and the validator goes on  

 sauropside is_a vertebrate => mouse is_a 

vertebrate ? answer : valid relation. Thus 

we can stop the process of searching for 

potentially erroneous "secondary" 

relations found by deduction/induction 

with mouse is_a sauropside. 

 

Induction 

Induction mechanism (for any R relation type): 

if A is_a B and A R C, then B R C may be 

possible (except for special cases or polysemy 

of A). Thus, if A is_a B is wrong, it is possible 

that B R C is also wrong. The outgoing 

relations of B which originate from the 

properties of A, with the exception of those 

derived from the hyponyms of B, must 

therefore be indicated as false (by affecting 

them with a negative vote). 

 

Example: let the wrong relation mouse is_a 

reptile => inferences on reptile based on the 

properties of mouse  

 

426

   

 

 

How to detect these false inferences, so as to 

negate them?  

 

By comparing with the hyponyms of reptile 

that have a lot of information: we know that 

tortoise is_a reptile. Among reptile relations, 

those derived from mouse properties, 

excluding those from turtle properties should 

be reported as false.  

 

 mouse has_part hairs, which is not the case 

with the tortoise => thus, the relation reptile 

has_part hairs (inferred  by induction) has 

to be reported as false. 

 

 on the opposite, mouse has_part head, and 

tortoise has_part head => thus, the relation 

reptile has_part head must be retained. 

 

Algorithms 

The following two algorithms (Algorithm 1 

and 2) reflect the principles developed above. 

The first algorithm is related to the deduction 

mechanisms. The second one is related to 

induction. 

The principle of these algorithms is to virtually 

simulate what could have been specifically 

deduced (for algorithm 1) or induced (for 

algorithm 2) and to eliminate what seems to be 

incompatible.  

Note that a relation that is not in the lexical 

network has a (virtual) weight equal to 0. The 

hyper function (resp. hypo) returns the list of 

hypernyms (resp. hyponyms) of the term given 

as parameter. 

For these secondary anomalies, one question 

remains: do the implemented endogenous 

mechanisms used detect everything? Or, more 

precisely, what proportion of anomalies is 

detected by these mechanisms? Moreover, are 

these correction mechanisms not likely to 

introduce errors, indicating as false some 

relations that are true? 

 

3.3 Actual and Experimental Results 

To evaluate the performance of our false 

relations detection system, we have (on a local 

copy of the lexical network JeuxDeMots) 

artificially added false hypernyms to terms.  

In fact, we applied our algorithm on the actual 

JDM data, in order to correct many errors, 

which was done successfully. But to perform 

an evaluation in a controlled environment, we 

made a copy in which we artificially 

introduced errors. 

On the actual data, we were able to halve the 

number of errors (from 1% to 0.5%). Most of 

the remaining errors do not fall into the scope 

of our proposed method, as they were not 

detectable through hypernym incompatibilities. 

For those remaining errors, other approaches 

should be devised. 

We verified manually and in depth that the 

experiments in controlled environment were 

not biased by the artificial addition of errors. 

The actual errors and the errors artificially 

added are of the same nature. We just added 

much more numerous and various errors in 

order to assess our method.  

We have in JDM a list of pairs of incompatible 

hypernyms: this means that a given term 

cannot have the two terms of a pair from this 

list as generic, unless it is polysemous. For 

example: fish - mammal; insect - reptile; 

animal - plant; plane - ship; man - woman; car 

- plane; train - boat, etc. We selected 250 

terms having as hypernym one of the generics 

above but not the second, which we added. We 

then launched on these 250 terms the 

mechanisms of inferences. We then applied on 

this sample of 250 terms our algorithms of 

detection of false relations to detect the 

relations to be eliminated. 

The inference mechanisms produced 4,500 

new relationships that we evaluated through 

the Askit 2   online application. We retained the 

3,600 new relations that were evaluated at least 

twice. The following board presents the results 

of the evaluation, globally and for some 

examples of couples of incompatible generics. 

                                                 2  http://www.jeuxdemots.org/askit.php 

427

  

 

 

 

% relations found 

by both 

algorithms 

global fish /  

*mammal 

insect / 

*reptile 

animal / 

*plant 

plane / 

*ship 

man / 

*woman 

% correctely found 97.6 98.2 95.6 98.4 96.1 99.2 

% false positives 2.4 1.8 4.4 1.6 3.8 0.8        

% false negatives 0.52 0.25 0.67 0.35 0.7 0.3 

Table 1: Evaluation of found relations with both algorithms according to hypernym terms. The first term is the 

correct one and the second is the one being invalidated. For the first two lines, the sum of each column is 100% 

as this refers to the amount of false relations. The last line is the percentage of correct relations that are supposed 

false by our algorithms. 

 

 

The terms with a star (*) are the false generics 

introduced in order to produce erroneous 

inferences. Overall, our algorithms recover 

97.6% of the false relations that have been 

inferred from an erroneous generic. They 

"miss" 2.4% of false relationships, and find 

0.52% false negatives (i.e. they assume as false 

some relations that are true). The analysis of 

false negatives indicates that these are either 

exceptions or relevant conclusions given the 

state of completion of the lexical network 

(important relations may be missing). 

Significant differences can be observed 

depending on the pairs of incompatible 

generics. Obviously, differences between man 

and woman make false inferences more easily 

detectable than between insect and reptile. It 

can be assumed that the network is much more 

extensively and precisely informed about the 

human species than about areas of specialty 

such as zoology; we also notice that in general, 

performance decreases with the degree of 

specialization of the field, due to the lesser 

information in the network. 

 

4 Conclusion 

Although the rate of anomalies in the JDM 

network is low, we can reduce it further by 

automatic endogenous mechanisms for 

detecting erroneous relationships. These 

relatively simple mechanisms make possible to 

detect a significant proportion of the 

potentially false "secondary" relations inferred 

from false "initial" relations. Moreover, since 

these relations, which are reported as 

suspicious, are invalidated once an expert has 

verified that they are erroneous, they can no 

longer give rise to new false inferences and 

thus serve as a breeding ground for the birth 

and spread of new errors; this also favours an 

overall decrease in the network error rate. On 

the other hand, "initial" errors are more 

difficult to detect automatically. However, the 

use of incompatible generic lists is an 

interesting lead insofar as it allows the alert to 

be given when a monosemic term has two 

incompatible terms as hypernyms. 

The method we propose can be applied to any 

lexico-semantic network whose structure is 

similar to that of JDM. As our approach relies 

on quite common relation types (hypernym, 

hyponym, etc.), it is valid for well known 

lexical resources like WordNet (Miller, 1995), 

and HowNet (Dong and Dong, 2006) to cite a 

few. Moreover, our method is independent of 

the language because it relies only on relations 

of a semantic nature. 

To conclude, the synergy between manual 

detection by players/contributors and 

automatic detection methods helps to maintain 

a reasonably low error rate in the JDM 

network. Such methods could be applied with 

great benefit for other resources. 

 

 

428

   

 

 function RelationList erroneousByDeduction (Term A, Term Z) 

// required: A is_a Z is an erroneous relation  

// result: list of the outgoing relations from A, being in the JDM network,  

//  which are potentially erroneous because A is_a Z is erroneous 

Begin 

 LR = new RelationList() 

 LT = hyper (A, Z)  // list of hypernyms of A, but not hypernyms of Z 

 For each B ∈ LT 

 Do LR = LR ∪ deduceErroneous (A, B, Z) 

  // list of relations outgoing from A which are potentially erroneous 

 EndFor 

 Return LR 

End 

 

function RelationList deduceErroneous (Term A, B, Z) 

 // required: A is_a B > 0 ; A is_a Z is an erroneous relation ; Z is_a B <= 0 

 // result: list of outgoing relations from A, being in the JDM network, 

 // which are potentially erroneous because A is_a Z is erroneous. 

 / B is an hypernym of A that the algorithm uses to detect potentially erroneous relations. 

Begin 

 L = new RelationList() 

 For each relation such as ZRY  // we check all the outgoing relations from Z 

 Do If   BRY <= 0   // BRY does not exist or is negative weighted 

  Then  If ARY > 0  // ARY exists (positive weighted) 

   Then L = L ∪ ARY 

   Endif 

  EndIf 

 EndFor 

 Return L 

End 

Algorithm 1: return a list of erroneous relations from a deductive point of view.  

 function RelationList erroneousByInduction (Term A, Term Z) 

// required: A is_a Z is an erroneous relation  

// result: list of the outgoing relations from Z, being in the JDM network,  

//  which are potentially erroneous because A is_a Z is erroneous 

Begin 

 LR = new RelationList() 

 For each relation such as ARC 

       // we check all the outgoing relations from A  

 Do If  ZRC > 0    // if it is outgoing from Z, it may be erroneous 

  Then If erroneousByInduction (A, C, Z) // is ZRC potentially erroneous? 

   Then LR = LR ∪ ZRC 

   EndIf 

  EndIf 

 EndFor 

 Return LR 

End 

 

function boolean isErroneousByInduction (Term A, C, Z) 

 // required: ARC > 0 ; A is_a Z is an erroneous relation ; ZRC > 0 

 // result: return True if and only if the relation ZRC, being in the JDM network, 

 // is potentially erroneous because A is_a Z is erroneous. C is the target term of an outgoing relation of A 

Begin 

 LT = hypo (Z,A)     // list of hyponyms of Z, except A 

 Term W = first_term (LT) 

 While  W exists and then WRC <= 0  // we check hyponyms of Z 

  Do W = next_term (LT) 

 EndWhile 

 Return W does not exist 

End 

Algorithm 2: return a list of erroneous relations from an inductive point of view. The erroneousByInduction 

function makes use of the Boolean function isErroneousByInduction. 

429

 References 

 

BEN OTHMANE ZRIBI C., MEJRI H., AND BEN 

AHMED M. (2007)  Un analyseur hybride pour la 

détection et la correction des erreurs cachées 

sémantiques en langue arabe, TALN 2007, 

Toulouse, 5–8 juin 2007  

BOUDIN F., AND HERNANDEZ N. (2012)  Détection 

et correction automatique d’erreurs d’annotation 

morpho-syntaxique du French TreeBank. TALN 

2012, Juin 2012, Grenoble. pp.281-291. 

BOURAOUI J.-L., BOISSIERE P., MOJAHID M., 

VIGOUROUX N., LAGARRIGUE A., AND VELLA F., 

NESPOULOUS J.-L. (2009)  Problématique 

d'analyse et de modélisation des erreurs en 

production écrite. Approche interdisciplinaire.  

TALN 2009, Senlis, 24-26 juin 2009  

DICKINSON M., AND MEURERS W.D. (2003)  

Detecting errors in part-of-speech annotation. 

EACL 2003 (10th Conference of the European 

Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics), pp.107–114, Budapest, Hungary. 

DONG Z. AND DONG Q. (2006)  Hownet and the 

Computation of Meaning. World Scientific 

Publishing Co., Inc., River Edge, NJ, USA. 

LAFOURCADE M. (2007)  Making people play for 

Lexical Acquisition. In Proc. SNLP 2007, 7th 

Symposium on Natural Language Processing. 

Pattaya, Thailande, 13-15 December 2007, 8 p. 

 

 

LAFOURCADE M., ZARROUK M., AND JOUBERT A. 

(2014)  About Inferences in a Crowdsourced 

Lexical-Semantic Network, EACL 2014 (14th 

Conference of the European Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics), 

Gothenburg (Sweden), April 2014  

LAFOURCADE M., LE BRUN N., AND JOUBERT A. 

(2015)  Games with a Purpose (GWAPS), ISBN: 

978-1-84821-803-1 July 2015, Wiley-ISTE, 158 

p. 

MILLER G A. (1995)  Wordnet: A Lexical Database 

for English.  Communications of the ACM. Vol. 

38, No. 11: 39-41. 

ZARROUK M., LAFOURCADE M., AND JOUBERT A. 

(2014)  About Inferences in a Crowdsourced 

Lexical-Semantic Network, EACL 2014 (14th 

Conference of the European Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics), 

Gothenburg (Sweden), April 2014  

ZARROUK M. AND LAFOURCADE M. (2014)  

Inferring Knowledge with Word Refinements in a 

Crowdsourced Lexical-Semantic Network. In proc 

of the the 25th International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (COLING 2014), 

Dublin, Irlande, 9 p. 

 

430