JeuxDeLiens: Word Embeddings and Path-Based Similarity for Entity Linking using the French JeuxDeMots Lexical Semantic 

Network 

Julien Plu1 Kévin Cousot2 

Mathieu Lafourcade2 Raphaël Troncy1 

Giuseppe Rizzo3 

(1) EURECOM, Sophia-Antipolis, France (2) LIRMM, Montpellier, France 

(3) ISMB, Turin, Italy julien.plu@eurecom.fr, kevin.cousot@lirmm.fr 

mathieu.lafourcade@lirmm.fr, raphael.troncy@eurecom.fr giuseppe.rizzo@ismb.it 

RÉSUMÉ Les systèmes de désambiguı̈sation d’entités nommées utilisent principalement sur des bases de connaissances encyclopédique telles que DBpedia ou Freebase. Dans ce papier, nous utilisons à la place, un réseau léxicalo-sémantique nommé JeuxDeMots pour conjointement désambiguı̈ser et typer les entités nommées. Notre approche combine les plongements de mots et la similitude de chemins dans un graphe résultant à des résultats encourageants sur un ensemble de documents provenant du journal Le Monde. 

ABSTRACT 

Entity linking systems typically rely on encyclopedic knowledge bases such as DBpedia or Freebase. In this paper, we use, instead, a French lexical-semantic network named JeuxDeMots to jointly type and link entities. Our approach combines word embeddings and a path-based similarity resulting in encouraging results over a set of documents from the French Le Monde newspaper. 

MOTS-CLÉS : entité nommée, désambiguı̈sation, jeuxdemots, réseau lexical. 

KEYWORDS: named entity, disambiguation, jeuxdemots, lexical network. 

1 Introduction 

There is an exponential growth of textual content made available on the Web, produced by anyone via a broad diversity of publishing platforms. Automated solutions to extract actionable insights from this content is therefore of utmost importance. Focusing on textual content, we identified four main challenges that the NLP community is tackling for performing an entity linking task : dealing with different genres (social media, video subtitles, newswire articles, search queries), written in different 

 

Information extraction aims to get structured information from unstructured text by attempting to interpret natural language text to extracting information about entities, relations among entities and linking entities to external referents. In detail, entity recognition aims to locate and classify entities in text into defined classes such as Person, Location or Organization. Entity linking (or entity disambiguation) aims to disambiguate entities in text to their corresponding counterpart, referred as resource, contained in a knowledge base. Each resource represents a real world entity with a specific identifier. 

Many knowledge bases can be used for doing entity linking : DBpedia (DBpedia, 2007), Free-base (Freebase, 2007), Wikidata (Wikidata, 2012) to name a few. Those knowledge bases are known for being broad in terms of coverage, while vertical knowledge bases also exist in specific domains, such as Geonames (Geonames, 2006), Musicbrainz (MusicBrainz, 2000), LinkedMDB (LinkedMDB, 2009), and here JeuxDeMots. 

We have decided to focus our work on linking entities using a lexical-semantic network as a referent base. We have identified four main lexical-semantic networks for the French language : Wolf (Sagot & Fier, 2008), JeuxDeMots (Lafourcade, 2007b), FLN (Lux-Pogodalla & Polguère, 2011) and Babelnet (Navigli & Ponzetto, 2012), the latter being multilingual. We have selected the JeuxDeMots network (Lafourcade, 2007a) as it offers daily updates and it is well-suited for disambiguation thanks to its polysemy representation. This network is an oriented graph where the nodes can be labeled with terms, concepts or any kind of textual item. The edges are oriented, weighted and indicate a specific type of relation between two vertices. They can be lexical (lemma, locution, action to verb, etc.) or semantic (hypernymy, meronymy, agent, etc.). So far, the JeuxDeMots network has more than 

1.2 

million nodes, 67 million edges and about 100 relationship types. 

The reminder of the paper is structured as follows : Section 2 detail the relevant previous work already done. Section 3 introduces our two steps approach for entity linking. Next, the Section 4 proposes an evaluation of this approach. Finally, we conclude and discuss some future work in Section 5. 

2 Related Work 

Currently, for the French language, the state of the art for entity linking suffers from a lack of evaluated approaches, resources and datasets. One of the most recent entity linking method (Stern et al., 2012) relies on a statistical model trained on a manually annotated corpus and uses features computed using a basic heuristic tool and extracted from a large knowledge base. Unfortunately, this method is hard to reproduce since the knowledge base and the corpus used in the experiments are not publicly available. We describe two methods that can be applied to French : Babelfy (Moro et al., 2014) and DBpedia Spotlight (Daiber et al., 2013). 

Babelfy proposes a graph-based approach where two main algorithms have been developed : random walk and a heuristic for finding the subgraph that contains most of the relations between the recognized mentions and candidates. The nodes are pairs (mention,entity) and the edges correspond to existing relationships in BabelNet (Navigli & Ponzetto, 2012) that are scored. Next, a semantic graph is built 

 Frequency) score computed for each entity. The goal of this score is to show that the discriminative strength of a mention is inversely proportional to the number of candidates it is associated with. This means that a mention that commonly co-occurs with many candidates is less discriminative. Although, those methods can be applied on French documents, they have never been thoroughly evaluated with this language due to a lack of proper benchmark datasets. Next, those methods do not take into account the different semantics that an entity might have (see in Section 3 an example with Paris). 

3 JeuxDeLiens Approach 

We have originally developed a named entity recognition (NER) model trained with the ETAPE (Gra-vier et al., 2012) corpus for recognizing entities in French documents. However, the corpus required a lot of pre-processing that was consisting of cleaning the transcripts (speech-to-text dataset). In fact, even after the cleaning the performance of the NER was very low. The extraction part not being our focus, we have assumed to take as input the surface forms of the entities that have to be linked and typed with the JeuxDeMots network. 

Our entity linking approach is designed in two steps : i) word embeddings, and ii) path-based similarity. As a running example, we will use the following three sentences : 

— Paris compte au 1er janvier 2013 plus de 2,2 millions d’habitants. 1 Paris stands for the French capital. 

— En matière de commerce, Paris a clairement affiché sa volonté. 2 Paris stands for the French government. 

— Paris fait ses premires apparitions comme mannequin dans plusieurs évènements de charité. 3 

Paris here for Paris Hilton. Entities are annotated beforehand in the text between double square brackets (e.g. [[Paris]]). We perform a preprocessing that consists in the following three steps : 

1. tokenizing the input text by respecting the annotated entities between double square brackets ; 

2. once the text is properly tokenized, we link each word to a node in the JeuxDeMots network, and we generate all the possible entity candidates. In the three sentences, the candidate entities for Paris are : i) Paris Hilton, ii) Paris, capitale 4, iii) Paris, gouvernement français 5, iv) Paris, prénom 6, and v) Paris, nom 7. We also map the words that are multitokens expression such as table de chevet 8. Finally, if no entity candidates are found, we assume the entity to be a novel entity 9 and will be linked to NIL ; 

3. once the mapping is done, we remove the stopwords. 

After this preprocessing, we have a list of words that represent the context of the document, and where each of them has its node mapped in the JeuxDeMots network. The next step is to select the best entity candidate in the list and we use a word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) embedding. 

1. As of 1 January 2013, Paris has more than 2.2 million inhabitants 

2. In terms of trade, Paris has clearly stated its will. 3. Paris made her first appearances as a model in several 

 

5. French government 6. firstname 7. familyname 8. nightstand 

 

In order to properly disambiguate the entities, we use word2vec as word embeddings method with a model trained over the frWac corpus (Baroni et al., 2009). This method has been chosen since a surface form might have more than one meaning as shown in our running example. A simple string comparison between surface forms, e.g. using the Levenshtein distance, is not efficient since the two contexts, of the entity and into JeuxDeMots shall be compared. In JeuxDeMots, the context of an entity is represented by his gloss (e.g. gouvernement français, prénom, capitale, etc.). For the first sentence, instead of comparing the surface form Paris with the words of the context, we use gouvernement français and the others gloss such as in Equation 1. The set 

W 

represents the following context : [compte, janvier, millions, habitants]. 

w2v([gouvernement, francais],W 

) (1) 

w2v([capitale],W 

) 

w2v([Paris,Hilton],W 

) 

w2v([prénom],W 

) 

w2v([nom],W 

) 

The entity candidate that got the best score is taken as the proper linked entity. We also propose to group the novel (NIL) entities that may identify the same real-world thing. We attach the same NIL value within and across documents. For example, if we take two different documents that share the same emergent entity, this entity will be linked to the same NIL value. We can then imagine different NIL values, such as NIL 1, NIL 2. We perform a string matching over the surface form between each novel entities that have been linked to NIL (or between each token if it is a multiple token mention). Concerning our running example, with this approach, all the Paris entities have been properly linked to their corresponding meaning. We use a path-based similarity method to find the type of the entity. 

3.2 Path-Based Similarity 

At this stage, we need to assign a type to an entity. From the JeuxDeMots network, we can gather the context words 

W 

, the entity 

e 

and the set of possible classes 

C. 

Although, we got 

W 

during the mapping step and 

e 

with word2vec, the class nodes are simply hand-picked nodes describing the class. Here, we only use lieu 10 for LOC, organisation for ORG and personne 11 for PER as classes. 

The logic is to find the best path in the JeuxDeMots network from 

W 

to each element of 

C 

passing by 

e. 

An example is represented in Figure 1 for the first sentence. In case 

e 

is a novel entity, we try to directly find the best path from 

W 

to each element of 

C. 

The JeuxDeMots network has two characteristics that we have to take into account : 1) a direct link from the entity to the class might not exist, there could be an indirect link (Paris (capitale) 

is-a−−→ 

métropole 12 

is-a−−→ 

lieu), or multiple links (Paris (capitale) 

is-a−−→ 

{ville 13, préfecture 14, destination touristique 15} and 2) the JeuxDeMots taxonomy has no constraints, has multiple words to express the same meaning of a class and has loops. 

10. place 

13. city 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzcmpGR2P1gheIEFfHm6r7gvadNoDSbzx5-Z8Milk2SzwHSUR9ytb1EQFh4v8yfpLF0BXWhmawg7Fn4deVIhLetg28fWgLtYZ8r8GRGAelScNFndnlduu5VFdHZ0pdqZ-4coul0Gw=w1280-h1031-v0

78ace518-fc76-47c7-a81b-9c9667905f7f

 are used in information retrieval (Franzoni et al., 2014), semantic path analysis (Song et al., 2015) and link prediction (Lü et al., 2009). Some of them only take nodes attributes into account while others are based on nodes neighborhood or even paths (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2007). We propose a path-based similarity measure inspired from LP-index (Lü et al., 2009). First, the score of a path 

µ 

is defined as : 

score(µ) 

= 

δ|µ|−1. ∑ 

∀e=(u,v)∈µ we.|R+ 

Te (u)|−1 

(2) 

With 

δ ∈ [0, 

1] a length-malus, 

|µ| 

the length of the path, 

R+ Te 

(u) 

the set of outgoing relations of 

u 

with the same type 

Te 

as 

e 

and 

we 

its weight. 

The similarity between two nodes 

u 

and 

v 

can then be expressed as : 

sim(u, v) 

= 1 

|Mu,v| . 

∑ 

∀µ∈Mu,v 

score(µ) 

(3) 

With 

Mu,v 

the set of paths between 

u 

and 

v. 

If the entity was found in the network we choose the class 

c 

= arg max 

c∈C simctx(W, e, c) 

with : 

simctx(W, e, c) 

= 

sims(W, e) 

+ 

sim(u, c) 

(4) 

And : 

sims(W, e) 

= 1 

|W 

| 

. ∑ 

∀w∈W sim(w, e) 

(5) 

FIGURE 1 – The 3 data layers : classes, named entity and context words. 

If the network does not contain the entity, then we only use its context to try and choose the class 

c 

= arg max 

 

sims(W, c). 

In practice, we limit the length of the paths to 2 and only the relevant types 

 

 

To evaluate JeuxDeLiens, we have selected 15 articles from the French newspaper Le Monde. We were not able to compare our approach with the ones used in Babelfly and DBpedia Spotlight. In fact, the used algorithms cannot be applied on the JeuxDeMots network (see Section 2) without changing their core. 

The French community suffers from a lack of datasets for training entity linking systems. Therefore, we have decided to build a dataset based on Le Monde newspaper articles. We have randomly selected 15 articles that we have manually annotated. Only the entities that represent a Person, a Location or an Organization have been annotated, and linked to their JeuxDeMots ID if they exists in the lexical-semantic graph, otherwise they have been linked to NIL. The NIL entities keep the same ID across the documents, in order to respect the NIL clustering logic detailed in Section 3.1. The tool BRAT 16 has been used for the annotation task. In order to create a dataset with proper statistics, we have decided to align the numbers as much as possible over the ones from OKE Challenge 2015 Task 1 (Nuzzolese et al., 2015) test dataset. We put together the statistics of these two datasets in Table 1 to be able to compare them. 

As scorer, we use the neleval scorer (Hachey et al., 2014) with the following metrics : — strong typed all match : performs a micro-averaged evaluation of all mentions. A mention 

is counted as correct if it is a correct link or a correct nil. A correct link must have the same span, entity type, and KB identifier as a gold link. A correct NIL must have the same span as a gold NIL. 

— entity ceaf : performs an evaluation based on a one-to-one alignment between system and gold entity clusters for both KB identifier and NIL across documents. 

— strong typed mention match : performs a micro-averaged evaluation of entity mentions. A system span must match a gold span exactly to be counted as correct and additionally requires the correct entity type. 

— strong link match : performs a micro-averaged evaluation of links. A system link must have the same span and KB identifier as a gold link to be counted as correct. 

— strong nil match : performs a micro-averaged evaluation of NIL entities. A system NIL must have the same span as a gold NIL to be counted as correct. 

— strong all match : performs a micro-averaged link evaluation of all mentions. A mention is counted as correct if is either a link match or a NIL match as defined above. 

As we can see, we evaluate JeuxDeLiens at multiple level in order to identify its strengths and weaknesses. The results are shown in Table 2. We also remind that we start from a score of 100% in F1 at extraction level as we take as input the correct surface forms of the entities. 

OKE2015 JeuxDeLiens Number of unique entities of type PERSON 155 152 

Number of unique entities of type LOCATION 90 102 Number of unique entities of type ORGANIZATION 122 131 

Number of entities of type PERSON 317 228 Number of entities of type LOCATION 123 117 

Number of entities of type ORGANIZATION 141 226 

TABLE 1 – Statistics over the dataset 

 

 strong typed all match 63.2 63.2 63.2 

entity ceaf 73.3 93.3 82.1 strong typed mention match 64.9 64.9 64.9 

strong link match 72.9 89.7 80.5 strong nil match 100 50 66.7 strong all match 77.2 77.2 77.2 

TABLE 2 – Results for JeuxDeLiens 

From the error analysis conducted, it emerges that the heterogeneity of the network plays an important role for entity linking. Indeed, the knowledge is unevenly distributed across the network and while some domains are well-supplied, some are not. The entity coverage is very satisfying 

(89.7% 

recall for the strong link match score) but some entities have a very few incident edges making a path difficult to find. This is the case for Boston Dynamics and BigDog. Symmetrically, human-related nodes (man, woman, human. . .) are heavily well-supplied. As they are high-degree nodes, more paths are found leading to more misclassification favoring PER. This explains why some entities have been mistyped. The entity ceaf score shows that the approach can succeed to give the same link for the entities that have the same meaning, including the ones that have been linked to same NIL across the documents. Nevertheless, the precision is a bit low because of a weakness of our NIL clustering method that might link unrelated entities if they share a same token in their mention. The score strong nil match reveals that when we link an entity to NIL, it is a good guess. However, our system still proposes some candidates for some entities that should be linked to NIL. Our word2vec measure has also a problem when processing a word that does not belong to the vocabulary since no similarity is computed. This impacts emergent entities that are present in JeuxDeMots but not in the frWac corpus. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have proposed JeuxDeLiens, a two steps method for disambiguating entities in French documents using the JeuxDeMots lexical semantic network. Although the evaluation has been made on a single newspaper article, the results of JeuxDeLiens are very encouraging and show that our approach can well disambiguate entities for French textual content. As future work, we aim to create a bigger evaluation dataset and to share it with the NLP community. We are also interested in finding a way to detect if no candidate entity matches, allowing us to spot missing data in the network. To do so, we plan to use the Deep Semantic Similarity Measure (DSSM) method (Huang et al., 2013) in order to directly compute similarities between the nodes and identify if the entity belongs to the network or not. Finally, to solve the word2vec problem, we plan to use the FastText library (Bojanowski et al., 2016) since it is robust against unknown vocabulary words because it uses letter-grams instead of tokens to compute embeddings. We can also improve the model by adding the full Wikipedia dump into the frWac corpus training data.

 

BARONI M., BERNARDINI S., FERRARESI A. & ZANCHETTA E. (2009). The wacky wide web : a collection of very large linguistically processed web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evaluation. 

BOJANOWSKI P., GRAVE E., JOULIN A. & MIKOLOV T. (2016). Enriching word vectors with subword information. arXiv preprint arXiv :1607.04606. 

DAIBER J., JAKOB M., HOKAMP C. & MENDES P. N. (2013). Improving efficiency and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction. In 

9th 

International Conference on Semantic Systems (I-SEMANTICS), Graz, Austria. 

DBPEDIA (2007). Dbpedia. http://wiki.dbpedia.org. 

FRANZONI V., MENCACCI M., MENGONI P. & MILANI A. (2014). Heuristics for semantic path search in wikipedia. In 

14th 

International Conference on Computational Science and Its Applications (ICCSA). 

FREEBASE (2007). Freebase. https://www.freebase.com. 

GEONAMES (2006). Geonames. http://www.geonames.org. 

GRAVIER G., ADDA G., PAULSSON N., CARR M., GIRAUDEL A. & GALIBERT O. (2012). The ETAPE corpus for the evaluation of speech-based TV content processing in the French language. In 

8th 

International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC). 

HACHEY B., NOTHMAN J. & RADFORD W. (2014). Cheap and easy entity evaluation. In 

52nd 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 

HUANG P.-S., HE X., GAO J., DENG L., ACERO A. & HECK L. (2013). Learning deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In 

22nd 

ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management (CIKM). 

LAFOURCADE M. (2007a). Jeux de mots. www.jeuxdemots.org/. 

LAFOURCADE M. (2007b). Making people play for Lexical Acquisition with the JeuxDeMots prototype. In 7th International Symposium on Natural Language Processing (SNLP’07). 

LIBEN-NOWELL D. & KLEINBERG J. (2007). The link-prediction problem for social networks. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 

LINKEDMDB (2009). Linkedmdb. http://www.linkedmdb.org. 

LÜ L., JIN C.-H. & ZHOU T. (2009). Similarity index based on local paths for link prediction of complex networks. Phys. Rev. E. 

LUX-POGODALLA V. & POLGUÈRE A. (2011). Construction of a french lexical network : Metho-dological issues. 

MIKOLOV T., SUTSKEVER I., CHEN K., CORRADO G. & DEAN J. (2013). Distributed representa-tions of words and phrases and their compositionality. CoRR. 

MORO A., RAGANATO A. & NAVIGLI R. (2014). Entity linking meets word sense disambiguation : a unified approach. TACL. 

MUSICBRAINZ (2000). Musicbrainz. https://musicbrainz.org. 

 

 (2015). The 1st Open Knowledge Extraction Challenge. In 

12th 

European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC). 

PLU J. (2016). Knowledge Extraction in Web Media : At The Frontier of NLP, Machine Learning and Semantics. In 

25th 

World Wide Web Conference (WWW), PhD Symposium. 

SAGOT B. & FIER D. (2008). Building a free french wordnet from multilingual resources. In Ontolex 2008. 

SONG M., HEO G. & DING Y. (2015). Sempathfinder : Semantic path analysis for discovering publicly unknown knowledge. Journal of Informetrics. 

STERN R., SAGOT B. & BÉCHET F. (2012). A joint named entity recognition and entity linking system. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Innovative Hybrid Approaches to the Processing of Textual Data. 

WIKIDATA (2012). Wikidata. https://www.wikidata.org.